Git - Git is a free, distributed version control system, that helps track and manage changes in code over time. 
It allow multiple developers to work on the same project, view previous version, and restore changes when needed.
Git is the version control system, it help track and manage the code, it provide CLI to interact with git

GitHub- it is platform which is used for the same and some extra functionalities 
It is used for source code management. Here we have the GUI


Other similar tools- bitbucket well suited with jira nd CI/CD
Gitlab well suited with CI/CD and AI
Github well suited for copilot github actions



Features of Git
1- Version Control System- Git keep track of every changes we make to our project files, we can back to previous version if required.

2- Repositories- A Git repositories is like a project central hub where everything related to the project is stored and managed
There are 2 type of Repositories:
Local Repo- This is the copy of the central repo which is stored in the computer, we can work on our project and make the changes here.
Remote Repo- This is the main or can say central repo which is stored on server like GitHub, here we and other can share the code and work on the project.

3- Commit- Every time we make change and save in the git that is called commit , the repo keep track off the commit we have made.

4- Branches- A Repo allow us to create the branch and work on the new feature and fixes,
Ex- we have a main branch for the stable code, and feature branch for the new feature we are developing.

5- Merging- Once we have done the work on the branches we have made then we can merge those branches into main branch.
This adds the changes we made in the project.

6- Cloning- Cloning is the process of making a complete copy of git repository, it’s like copying the entire project from the central local to our computer.

Advantage of using Git
Distributed System- Every developer have complete project copy to their system which allow developer’s to work offline.
Performance- Git is fast and efficient, handle large project with ease.
Branching & Merging- Git provide the lightweight branching and easy merging facility which allow parallel development and feature isolation.
Collaboration- Tools like GitHub enhance team collaboration, code review and project management.
Track Changes- Git tracks changes and maintain a history, which makes easy to revert to previous version.

Step to SetUp Git
Step1- Install Git: Download and install git from its official website: Git - Install for Windows 

Step2- Configure Git: Setup the username and email
git config --global user.name "anantj-devops"
git config --global user.email "anantjain1717@gmail.com"

Step3- Create a Repository : Create a project directory and initialize a git repo.
git init

Step4- Make the first commit: create a file inside the folder and add the file to the staging are and then commit the changes.
git add .
or 
git add filename
Then
git commit -m "comment msg"

 Basic Git Commands
Git init: Initializes a new git repo
git init

Git rm –cached <filename>: this command is used to unstaged the staged file after running git add . 
git rm --cached <filename>

Git restore <filename>: to recover deleted file
git restore <filename>
Git Clone: Clone a remote repository to our local system
Note- this download the entire project file to the local system
git clone [URL]

Git add : It stages the changes to be committed 
git add .
Or 
git add <filename>

Git commit -m : this command commit the stages changes with a msg.
git commit -m "comment msg"

Git push : this command pushes the commit to the remote repo/central repo.
git push origin <branch name>

Git pull : This command fetch and merge the changes from the remote repo to the local repo.
git pull origin <branch name>

Git Status: Shows the status of changes in the working director.
git status


Drawbacks: Branch merging conflicts are challenging to resolve.

Advance Concept of Git
Branching: 
1- Check Current Branch:
git status

2- Check local branches: 
git branch

3- Check remote branches:
git branch -r

4- Check All branches(remote and local):
git branch -a

5- Create Branch:
git branch feature1

6- Rename current branch:
git branch -m <new-name>

7- Rename another branch:
git branch -m <old-name> <new-name>

8- Switch Branch:
git checkout feature1
Or
git switch feature1

9- Create + Switch Branch:
git checkout -b feature2
Or
git switch -c feature

10- Merge Branch:
git checkout main
git merge feature1

11- Delete a Branch: 
git branch -d <branch-name>
For force delete-
git branch -D <branch-name>

12- Compare Branch:
git diff <main-branch> <feature-branch>

13- See Merged Branch:
git branch --merged

14- See Un-Merged Branch:
git branch --no-merged

15-  Push a branch to remote:
git push origin <branch-name>

16- Delete a remote branch:
git push origin --delete <branch-name>

17- Fetch all remote branch: Download branch info from remote
git fetch --all

18- Find which branch contains a commit:
git branch --contains <commit-id>

19- Push all local Branches:
git push --all origin

Connect Git to GitHub:
Step1- Create a repo in github
Step2- Connect github repo to the local git 
git remote add origin <repo-url>

Step3- Verify the connection 
git remote -v

Step4- Push file to remote repo
git push -u origin main
Push- upload commits
Origin- github repo
-u - remember this connection for future push and pull 
Main- branch name from the branch we want to push the file
Important Commands:
1- Change Github Repo URL: to configure any other remote repo locally 
Ex- currently we have added remote origin - anant-linux-repo but now you want to change this origin to any other github repo like to- anant-git-note-repo
git remote set-url origin <new-repo-url>

2- Remove Github Connection:
git remote remove origin
Or 
git remote rm origin

Other Impt command after connecting git and github:
1- Clone an existing repository: it downloads all the project files from remote repo to local computer
git clone <repo-url>

2- Push a complete new branch to github:
git push origin <branch-name>

3- Download and merge changes from github:
git pull origin master

4- To push from local master branch to github master branch
git push origin master:master
Or
git push origin master
Or
git push
Or 
git push -u origin master

5- To push from local login-feature branch to remote repo master branch
git push origin login-feature:master

6- To push from local login-feature branch to remote repo login-feature branch
git push origin login-feature:login-feature


